# Usage

## What can you expect?

Deconvolution results will vary with the quality of the
microscopy images and will always be hampered by mismatches between
the PSF of the microscopy and what is given as input to the software
(PSF mismatch).

Importantly RL based methods also assume that the image formation can
be described as a linear process, something which is only approximate
since any interesting sample will both absorb and refract light. This
assumption is promptly broken by saturated pixels in the images so
please inspect the images before deconvolving them.

The "Born and Wolf" PSF model that is included with deconwolf at the
moment should be a good starting point since it only requires very few
parameters. Unfortunately it is a compromise between simplicity and
accuracy since the derivation includes many assumptions that typically
are met.

It is likely that better results can be obtained by using more
advanced models (like the Gibson-Lanni) or by experimentally
estimating the PSF based on experimental data. However, to find a
better PSF for a specific microscope and sample it typically not
simple.

Ideally one should acquire a sample with both widefield and a super
resolution method to be able to fine tune the PSF model, and to be
able to detect potential deconvolution artifacts due to possible PSF
mismatch.

> [!CAUTION]
> Deconvolution is not guaranteed to improve microscopy images
> and might artefacts. Use your judgment!


## Running deconwolf
Deconwolf has a command line interface (CLI), i.e., you would
typically run it from a terminal. However, here is also a
[GUI](https://github.com/elgw/deconwolf-gui) that might be handy.


To deconvolve an image (say `dapi_001.tif`) you need an approximation
of the PSF of your particular microscope at the given emission wave
length.

If you don't have one you can create one according to the Born-Wolf
model with `dw_bw` that is shipped with deconwolf.

The basic information that you need to know is
- The numerical aperture, NA.
- The refractive index of the immersion, ni. Common media are air (ni = 1)
   and oil (ni = 1.51) and silicon oil (ni = 1.405).
- The lateral size of the pixels in the image.
- The axial size of the pixels in the image, i.e. distance between the
  images/planes.

For example, if NA = 1.45, ni = 1.515 pixel size = 130 nm,
distance between planes = 250 nm, a PSF (`PSF_DAPI.tif`) can be generated by:

``` shell
dw_bw --resxy 130 --resz 250 --lambda 461 --NA 1.45 --ni 1.515 psf_dapi.tif
```

> [!TIP]
> You can of course re-use the PSF with multiple images. Please make sure
> to keep the `log.txt` file, generated along with the PSF, to know what
> parameters were used.

> [!NOTE]
> Please note that deconwolf does not read any meta data from the tif
> files regarding pixel size etc. Hence it is the PSF file that determines
> those factors implicitly.

With a PSF at hand the image can be deconvolved with a command line like this:

``` shell
dw --iter 40 dapi_001.tif psf_dapi.tif
```

When done, **dw** will write a new image called `dw_dapi_001.tif`
along with a log file called `dw_dapi_001.tif.log.txt`.

> [!CAUTION] By default, the pixel values of the output image will be scaled to
> make most out of the 16-bit image format. If absolute intensities matter,
> please read on the possible ways to handle that below.

For a list of the available command line options, please see:

``` shell
dw_bw --help
dw --help
```

On Linux/Mac there should also be a manual installed, which can be
opened by:

``` shell
man dw
man dw_bw
```

If the manuals are not available on your system, they can also be
found at this link
[https://github.com/elgw/deconwolf/tree/master/doc].


## Test data
There is a single nuclei in the `demo` subfolder (described in
README.md), which is there only for you to test that the programs runs
and gives something reasonable back.

More test images can be found on the
[DeconvolutionLab2](http://bigwww.epfl.ch/deconvolution/deconvolutionlab2/)
web page. Please note that in some cases the PSFs do not contain
enough z-planes for a proper deconvolution.

## Memory considerations
If you have 16 GB of RAM, images up to [1024x1024x60] pixels should
work without tiling. If deconwolf crashes because it runs of out
memory you can:

 1. Use fewer threads, i.e. specify **--threads N**.
 2. Consider switching to a lower quality on the boundaries with
    **--bq 1**. The option **--bq 0** is not recommended for normal
    images (since it assumes that the image repeats itself around the
    edges which is bad particularly in the axial direction).

Accordingly the lowest memory usage will be when you combine these
things i.e. calling dw with **--threads 1 --bq 1**. If that still uses
too much memory you have to tell dw to process the image in tiles with
the **--tilesize N** option.

The peak memory usage is written at the end of the log file.

## PSF considerations
deconwolf requires that the PSF is centered, i.e., that the largest
value is in the middle.  If you generate the PSF with some other
program you might have to center it first. In our experience it is
better to have a PSF with odd sizes, i.e. that the PSF is centered at
a certain pixel and not between them. Ideally the PSF should have at
least $2P-1$ planes where $P$ is the number of planes of the input image.

If the PSF has more planes than needed, it will be cropped
automatically when loaded. If it has fewer than the ideal number of
planes, an warning will be issued.

The PSF might also be cropped in the lateral plane (to save some
memory). To prevent that, add the command line argument **--xyfactor
0**.

## Supported image formats
Currently deconwolf does only support tif images, specifically:
multi-page, 8-bit unsigned, 16-bit unsigned or 32-bit floats. The data
should be written in strip mode (typically the default output
format). The output is either 16-bit unsigned or 32-bit floating point
(with the **--float** flag) and can be read by Matlab, ImageJ, etc.
If you use 16-bit output note that images will be scaled in order to
not be saturated. The scaling value can be found at the end of the log
files.

## Log files and output
 * The reported error is the mean square error between the input image
   and the current guess convolved with the PSF. Please note that deconwolf
   doesn't know how the deconvolved images should look like so this isn't
   in any way a measurement of how good image quality you get out of the
   program.
 * If the 16-bit output format is used, the scaling is reported in the
   log file like:
   ```
   $ cat dw_dapi_001.tif.log.txt | grep scaling
   scaling: 0.425100
   ```
   That means, in order to go back to absolute intensities, divide by
   that number.
 * If deconwolf finished normally you will find that it ends with something
   like:
   ```
   Iteration 19/20, MSE=2.481362e+04
   Iteration 20/20, MSE=2.235636e+04
   1.957566% pixels at bg level in the output image.
   scaling: 0.425100
   Took: 28.767448 s
   peakMemory: 4420728 kiB
   Fri Jan 22 16:42:22 2021
   ```
   If it doesn't, chances are that deconwolf run out of memory and crashed.


## Questions and Answers

### It takes a long time before deconwolf starts iterating
FFTW is self tuning and perform some optimizations whenever
presented to a new problem size. The result of this tuning is called
wisdom and is stored in files like `fftw_wisdom_float_threads_16.dat`
by deconwolf in `~/config/deconwolf/`. Those files can in general not
be transferred to other machines.

This self-tuning can take considerable time but should only be needed
once per problem size. To turn of the self-tuning use the **--noplan**
flag.


### How can I prepare tif files for deconwolf?
Deconwolf only accept tif files with one channel per file. ImageJ/FIJI
is typically helpful for conversions. For ND2 files check out
[randiantkit](https://github.com/ggirelli/radiantkit) or
[nd2tool](https://github.com/elgw/nd2tool).

### How do I get metadata from ND2-files?
You could use either [nd2tool](https://github.com/elgw/nd2tool) or the
more mature [showinf](https://www.openmicroscopy.org/bio-formats/downloads/) from
openmicroscopy. With showinf you could do something like:

```
$ bftools/showinf -nopix -omexml iAM337_20190830_001.nd2 > omexml

$ cat omexml | grep -B 1 -A 2 dObjectiveNA
            <OriginalMetadata>
               <Key>dObjectiveNA</Key>
               <Value>1.45</Value>
            </OriginalMetadata>

$ cat omexml | grep EmissionWavelength | grep Channel:0:
         <Channel Color="-16711681" EmissionWavelength="810.0" EmissionWavelengthUnit="nm" ID="Channel:0:0" Name="ir800" SamplesPerPixel="1">
         <Channel Color="-2147467009" EmissionWavelength="700.0" EmissionWavelengthUnit="nm" ID="Channel:0:1" Name="a700" SamplesPerPixel="1">
         <Channel Color="16056319" EmissionWavelength="488.0" EmissionWavelengthUnit="nm" ID="Channel:0:2" Name="a488" SamplesPerPixel="1">
         <Channel Color="-16776961" EmissionWavelength="695.0" EmissionWavelengthUnit="nm" ID="Channel:0:3" Name="Cy5" SamplesPerPixel="1">
         <Channel Color="-1241579265" EmissionWavelength="542.0" EmissionWavelengthUnit="nm" ID="Channel:0:4" Name="tmr" SamplesPerPixel="1">
         <Channel Color="-9109249" EmissionWavelength="590.0" EmissionWavelengthUnit="nm" ID="Channel:0:5" Name="a594" SamplesPerPixel="1">
         <Channel Color="570490879" EmissionWavelength="432.0" EmissionWavelengthUnit="nm" ID="Channel:0:6" Name="dapi" SamplesPerPixel="1">

$ cat omexml | grep PhysicalSizeZ= | head -n 1
      <Pixels BigEndian="false" DimensionOrder="XYCZT" ID="Pixels:0" Interleaved="false" PhysicalSizeX="0.129780110998775" PhysicalSizeXUnit="µm" PhysicalSizeY="0.129780110998775" PhysicalSizeYUnit="µm" PhysicalSizeZ="0.2" PhysicalSizeZUnit="µm" SignificantBits="16" SizeC="7" SizeT="1" SizeX="1024" SizeY="1024" SizeZ="81" Type="uint16">
...
```

### How can I run deconwolf for many files?
Either use the [GUI](https://github.com/elgw/deconwolf-gui), or write your own
script in your favorite language.

### Don't you have more PSF models?
No, not at this time. Please check out the
[PSF Generator](http://bigwww.epfl.ch/algorithms/psfgenerator/) from EPFL.


### What about image dimensions?

**dw** report image dimensions in the same way as ImageJ (although dw does
not understand time and channel dimensions). For example the file
`dapi_001.tif` in the `demo/` folder is reported to have the shape
**101x201x40** by dw and ImageJ.

Other tools might report it the other way around, for example:

skimage reports the size **40x201x101** by
``` python
>>> from skimage import io
>>> I = io.imread('dapi_001.tif')
>>> I.shape
```

In general this is nothing to worry about, see
[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Row-_and_column-major_order]
for a discussion around this topic.


### Maximizing throughput
To get a high throughput, i.e., many processed images / hour it is
typically a little faster to process many images in parallel (if
enough RAM).  Here are some example timings based on images:
[2048x2048x20], psf: [117x117x39] **\--iter 20**, **\--bq 2**. Using
dw version 0.1.0 on an AMD Ryzen 3700X:

 - One dw (using **\--threads 8**) took 88 s using 7294 MB RAM.

 -> 40 images / hour or 88 s / image

 - Two dw in parallel (using **\--threads 4**) took 2 m 44 s using 2x7106 =
   14212 MB RAM

 -> 43 images / hour or 82 s / image

 - Four dw in parallel (using **\--threads 2**) took 297 s using 6795x4 =
   27181 MB RAM

 -> 48 images / hour or 74 s / image

 - Eight dw in parallel (using **\--threads 1**) took 9 m 12 s, using
   6712x8 = 53696 MB RAM

-> 52 images / hour or 69 s / image


It is also possible to mix a few instances of dw using the CPU and a
few offloading calculations to the GPU (with **--method
shbcl**). Results would depends on the GPU/CPU combination.
